building: add Windows quick start with ia32 (#162)
phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc: building/Windows.md

# Windows

> If we want we can build Phoenix-rtos images for all targets and run `ia32-generic-qemu` on Windows with Cygwin and WSL.

Reviewer: I would prefer to use impersonal constructions if personal ones are not necessary.
For example:
```suggestion
It is possible to build Phoenix-rtos images for all targets and run `ia32-generic-qemu` on Windows using Cygwin or WSL.

```
I'm not sure if we have a defined way of maintaining documentation, and perhaps it would be worth discussing?

## Cygwin

In the beginning, we need to download libUSB and set the QEMU environment.

To do that we need to simply download QEMU from the official website which is targeted to our system. The same

> situation is with libUSB, but we need to follow the instructions provided by the creator.

Reviewer: I would simplify it, no need to tell 3 times that something needs to be downloaded.

* [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/download/#windows)

> * [libUSB](https://github.com/libusb/libusb)

Reviewer: I would also add that is need to install Git

> * [libUSB](https://github.com/libusb/libusb)

Reviewer: I would create a step-by-step instruction on how to install this tools. I know it may seem simple and unnecessary, but I would stick to the convention that it should be accessible to everyone. 

So I would use dropdown lists, for example, as it's done in building:
![image](https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-doc/assets/116297248/72e730c2-3d75-4f1f-89d2-1026faab94aa)

Next up we need to download Cygwin from the official website. It is a collection of Open Source tools that provide
functionality similar to a Linux distribution on Windows.

* [Cygwin](https://cygwin.com/install.html)

The installation process is in this case also a package manager. After selecting mirror we can easily select what
packages we want, but in larger groups, this can be annoying that's why we only select two elements (They will be
installed with dependencies) which are mandatory to use package manager in Cygwin terminal.

Those are `Lynx` and `Wget`. Thanks to them, we will be able to install `apt-cyg` and work with a package similar way
to Linux.

> Cygwin has a problem with translating multiple elements at once. Is suggested to use commands separately

Reviewer: I would simplify this and create as instruction, such as how to install Cygwin. It might also be worthwhile to use a dropdown list.

```

After all of that, we need to run Cygwin installation because it will download all the needed dependencies without
needing to do this manually.

The next step is to prepare the genext2fs library and clone a repository. We need to make manually genext2fs library
because Cygwin doesn't support it, and it's mandatory in case of creating images for the ia32 system.

To make it simply paste this into the Cygwin terminal (Same as before we want to use commands line by line):

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/bestouff/genext2fs

cd genext2fs

./autogen.sh
./configure
make
make install
make check

cd
rm -rf genext2fs apt-cyg

git clone --recursive https://github.com/phoenix-rtos/phoenix-rtos-project/
```

Now we can simply follow instructions about building toolchains remembering to use commands to build inside

> phoenix-rtos-project folder.

Reviewer: Is it then worth repeating here if it's already in building/README.md? Wouldn't a comment with a "Windows" label be sufficient, should such arise?

> (Quick tip: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up this process)

Reviewer: Good idea to note this as a tip

(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh riscv64-phoenix ~/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix)
(cd phoenix-rtos-build/toolchain/ && ./build-toolchain.sh sparc-phoenix ~/toolchains/sparc-phoenix)
```

Adding toolchains binaries to the PATH variable also can be tricky. On Windows, we move over folders with names
containing white spaces, after using:

``` bash
echo "export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/toolchains/i386-pc-phoenix/i386-pc-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/arm-phoenix/arm-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/riscv64-phoenix/riscv64-phoenix/bin/:$HOME/toolchains/sparc-phoenix/sparc-phoenix/bin/" >> $HOME/.bashrc
```

We need to fix paths e.g. `C:\x\y z\d` we must change to `C:\x\'y z'\d` simple change will fix all unwanted messages at
the start of the Cygwin terminal and will allow us to use the toolchain without setting the path every time.

To test is recommended to use this build command:

``` bash
TARGET=ia32-generic-qemu CONSOLE=serial phoenix-rtos-build/build.sh clean core fs image project test
```

And to run QEMU with this image we can use

``` bash
./scripts/ia32-generic-qemu-test.sh
```

> ## VSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

```

WSL is based on a Linux virtualization environment on a Windows environment.
To properly install WSL is needed to allow virtualization in BIOS settings as default they are disabled.

WSL we can easily download via

```powershell
winget install wsl
```

> In PowerShell (Remember always run as administrator).

Reviewer: I would add information about running PowerShell as an administrator above the code block.

After that we need to set up an environment in our case we aim for Ubuntu-22.04 to install it simply just use:

```powershell
wsl --install -d Ubuntu-22.04
```

WSL will install the subsystem and all needed components. After proper installation we can type in PowerShell `wsl` and
the whole subsystem will start up (May take some time).
On the first start, you will be prompted to create an account in the subsystem (sudo credentials).

> After that simply follow the instructions written in the Building process and quick-start for ia32-generic-qemu.

Reviewer: I would add information that you can continue with Linux instructions.
Something like:  
After this, you can proceed to the building[link] and continue with the instructions for the Linux system.

> (Same Quick tips: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up the toolchain
> building process and to build an image is recommended to use the same command as in Cygwin)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Quick tip: It is not mandatory but turning off Real-Time Protection in Windows Defender speeds up the toolchain
building process and to build an image is recommended to use the same command as in Cygwin)

```

[Building Phoenix-RTOS image](README.md)

<!--- USB SUPPORT FOR WSL AND CYGWIN TODO --->

## MSYS2 (#UnderResearch)

### See also

> 1. [Building Phoenix-RTOS image](README.md)
> 2. [Building script](script.md)
> 3. [Reference project](project.md)
> 4. [Table of Contents](../README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Building Phoenix-RTOS image](README.md)
2. [Toolchain](toolchain.md)
3. [Building script](script.md)
4. [Reference project](project.md)
5. [Table of Contents](../README.md)
```
